.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.TH RUSTOMATO 1 "2026-05-31" "rustomato 2.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rustomato \- A simple Pomodoro timer for the command line
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrustomato\fR [\fB\-\-verbose\fR] [\fB\-\-no-hooks\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR] <\fIcommand\fR> [<\fIargs\fR>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Rustomato is a command-line Pomodoro timer written in Rust. It manages
pomodori and breaks as stateful sessions persisted in a local SQLite
database, runs user-provided hooks at lifecycle transitions, and
provides reports on productivity patterns.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-verbose\fR
Enable verbose output. Prints diagnostic information to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-\-no-hooks\fR
Disable hook execution entirely.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print version information.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "init"
Initialize the rustomato root directory with sample hook scripts.
.TP
\fBrustomato init\fR
Creates the \fIhooks/\fR subdirectory inside \fB$RUSTOMATO_ROOT\fR
(or \fI~/.rustomato/hooks/\fR by default) with non-executable sample
hook scripts for all 24 events. Make scripts executable with
\fIchmod +x\fR to enable them.
.SS "status"
Show the currently active or most recently finished session.
.TP
\fBrustomato status\fR
Prints the active pomodoro or break, or "Nothing active" if none.
.SS "list"
List recent pomodori and breaks.
.TP
\fBrustomato list\fR [\fB\-\-limit\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-\-no-header\fR]
Show a table of recent entries with truncated UUID, kind, start time,
and timeline. Default limit is 10. Use \fB\-\-no-header\fR for
scripting-friendly output.
.SS "show"
Show detailed information about a specific session.
.TP
\fBrustomato show\fR <\fIuuid\fR>
Display full details for a session identified by UUID prefix, negative
index (\fB-1\fR through \fB-9\fR for recent finished pomodori), or
timestamp (\fBHH:MM\fR or RFC 3339). Shows annotations and interrupts.
.SS "pomodoro start"
Start a new pomodoro.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro start\fR [\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIMIN\fR] [\fB\-\-force\fR]
Start a pomodoro with the given duration (default: 25 minutes).
.ti +4
The process blocks until the timer expires or Ctrl-C is pressed.
.ti +4
If \fB\-\-force\fR is given, any currently active session is
force-cancelled (pomodoro) or force-finished (break) before starting.
.SS "pomodoro interrupt"
Record an interruption on the active or most recently finished pomodoro.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro interrupt\fR [\fB\-\-kind\fR \fIKIND\fR] [\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR]
Increment the interruption counter. \fIKIND\fR is \fBinternal\fR
(default) or \fBexternal\fR. The pomodoro continues running.
With \fB\-\-target\fR, target a specific past pomodoro instead of the
active one.
If a break is active, the interrupt is recorded on the most recently
finished pomodoro instead.
.SS "pomodoro annotate"
Add an annotation to a session.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro annotate\fR [\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR] [\fITEXT\fR...]
Attach annotation text to the active session, or to a specific session
using \fB\-\-target\fR. Text can be provided as arguments or read from
stdin if omitted.
.SS "pomodoro log"
Log an externally completed pomodoro.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro log\fR [\fB\-\-started-at\fR \fITS\fR] [\fB\-\-finished-at\fR \fITS\fR] [\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIMIN\fR]
Record a pomodoro that was completed outside of rustomato (e.g. using
a physical timer). Timestamps are in RFC 3339 / ISO 8601 format.
At least one of \fB\-\-started-at\fR or \fB\-\-finished-at\fR is
required. If only one is given, \fB\-\-duration\fR (default: 25) is
used to compute the other.
.SS "pomodoro cancel"
Cancel the currently active pomodoro, or a specific one with --target.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro cancel\fR [\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR]
Cancel the active pomodoro and record its cancelled state in the
database. With \fB\-\-target\fR, cancel a specific past pomodoro
identified by UUID prefix, negative index (\fB-1\fR..\fB-9\fR), or
timestamp (\fBHH:MM\fR / RFC 3339).
.SS "pomodoro delete"
Delete a past pomodoro from the database.
.TP
\fBrustomato pomodoro delete\fR \fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR
Hard-delete a past pomodoro and its associated annotations and
interrupt log entries. Requires \fB\-\-target\fR or a positional index
(\fB-1\fR..\fB-9\fR). Cannot delete an active pomodoro \(em cancel it
first. Useful for correcting data-entry mistakes (wrong time, wrong
annotation target, duplicates).
.SS "break start"
Start a break.
.TP
\fBrustomato break start\fR [\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIMIN\fR] [\fB\-\-force\fR]
Start a break. If \fB\-\-duration\fR is omitted, the duration is
auto-calculated based on consecutive finished pomodori:
0-3 pomodori = 5 minutes, 4/8/12... = 15 minutes (long break).
.ti +4
If \fB\-\-force\fR is given, any currently active session is closed
first. Ctrl-C finishes a break rather than cancelling it.
.SS "break annotate"
Add an annotation to a break.
.TP
\fBrustomato break annotate\fR [\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR] [\fITEXT\fR...]
Same as \fBpomodoro annotate\fR but scoped to breaks.
.SS "break log"
Log an externally completed break.
.TP
\fBrustomato break log\fR [\fB\-\-started-at\fR \fITS\fR] [\fB\-\-finished-at\fR \fITS\fR] [\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIMIN\fR]
Record a break that was completed outside of rustomato. Timestamps
are in RFC 3339 / ISO 8601 format. At least one of
\fB\-\-started-at\fR or \fB\-\-finished-at\fR is required. If only
one is given, \fB\-\-duration\fR (default: 5) is used to compute
the other.
.SS "break cancel"
Cancel the currently active break, or a specific one with --target.
.TP
\fBrustomato break cancel\fR [\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR]
Cancel the active break. With \fB\-\-target\fR, finish a specific past
break (Ctrl-C on a break always finishes it rather than cancelling).
.SS "break delete"
Delete a past break from the database.
.TP
\fBrustomato break delete\fR \fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR
Hard-delete a past break and its associated annotations and interrupt
log entries. Requires \fB\-\-target\fR or a positional index
(\fB-1\fR..\fB-9\fR). Cannot delete an active break \(em cancel it
first.
.SS "report day"
Daily productivity report.
.TP
\fBrustomato report day\fR [\fB\-\-date\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR]
Show a summary of pomodori and breaks for the given date (default: today).
.SS "report week"
Weekly productivity report.
.TP
\fBrustomato report week\fR [\fB\-\-date\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR]
Show a weekly summary for the week containing the given date (default: today).
.SS "report month"
Monthly productivity report with week-by-week breakdown.
.TP
\fBrustomato report month\fR [\fB\-\-date\fR \fIYYYY-MM|YYYY-MM-DD\fR] [\fB\-\-months\fR \fIN\fR]
Show a multi-month report with week-by-week breakdown for each month.
\fB\-\-months\fR defaults to 3 (shows the current month plus 2 previous).
.SS "report last"
Rolling window report for the last N days.
.TP
\fBrustomato report last\fR [\fB\-\-date\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR] [\fB\-\-days\fR \fIN\fR]
Show a report for the last N days ending on the given date (default: today, 7 days).
.SS "report interruptions"
Interruption pattern analysis.
.TP
\fBrustomato report interruptions\fR [\fB\-\-date\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR] [\fB\-\-days\fR \fIN\fR]
Analyse interruption patterns by hour of day and day of week for the
last N days (default: 7).
.SS "completions"
Generate shell completions.
.TP
\fBrustomato completions\fR <\fISHELL\fR>
Generate shell completion scripts for \fIbash\fR, \fIzsh\fR,
\fIfish\fR, \fIpowershell\fR, or \fIelvish\fR. Output is written to
stdout.
.SS "export"
Export pomodori and breaks as CSV.
.TP
\fBrustomato export\fR [\fB\-\-from\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR] [\fB\-\-to\fR \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR]
Export all entries in the given date range as CSV to stdout. Each row
includes the UUID, kind, planned duration, timestamps, status,
interruption count, elapsed minutes, and annotations as a JSON column.
Defaults to all entries since the beginning of time until now.
.SH BREAK DURATION AUTO-CALCULATION
Following the classic Pomodoro Technique (Cirillo), \fBbreak start\fR
without \fB\-\-duration\fR automatically picks a duration based on
how many pomodori have been finished consecutively:
.PP
.RS
.TS
tab(;) box;
c s
l l.
Pomodori since last reset;Break duration
0-3;5 min (short break)
4, 8, 12, ...;15 min (long break)
.TE
.RE
.PP
The counter resets after a long break (duration >= 10) or at midnight.
Short breaks (duration < 10) do not reset the counter. Only finished
pomodori count toward the total; cancelled and stale entries are ignored.
.SH STATE TRANSITIONS
.TS
box;
cb cb
l l.
State;Description
New;Not yet started
Active;Timer is running
Finished;Timer expired normally
Cancelled;Cancelled by user (pomodoro only)
Stale;Process died without cleanup
.TE
.SS "Differences between pomodoro and break"
A pomodoro can be interrupted (counter incremented, keeps running) or
cancelled via Ctrl-C. A break cannot be interrupted; Ctrl-C finishes
it rather than cancelling it.
.SH HOOKS
Rustomato can execute user-provided scripts at lifecycle transitions.
Hooks live in \fB$RUSTOMATO_ROOT/hooks/\fR and are looked up by
filename.
.SS "Hook events"
.TS
box;
cb cb
l l.
Event;Aborts operation?
BeforeStartPomodoro, BeforeStartBreak;yes
BeforeFinishPomodoro, BeforeFinishBreak;yes
BeforeCancelPomodoro;yes
BeforeInterruptPomodoro;yes
BeforeLogPomodoro;yes
BeforeAnnotatePomodoro, BeforeAnnotateBreak;yes
BeforeDeletePomodoro, BeforeDeleteBreak;yes
After-* (all above);no
.TE
.SS "Hook execution"
.IP \(bu 2
Hook path: \fB$RUSTOMATO_ROOT/hooks/<event-filename>\fR
.IP \(bu 2
If the file does not exist or is not executable, it is silently skipped
(shown in \fB\-\-verbose\fR mode).
.IP \(bu 2
If \fB\-\-no-hooks\fR was passed, all hooks are skipped.
.IP \(bu 2
The hook is spawned via \fBexecve\fR. The parent polls \fBtry_wait()\fR
every 50ms until the hook exits or the timeout is reached.
.IP \(bu 2
On timeout: \fBSIGKILL\fR is sent, then \fBwait()\fR to reap.
.IP \(bu 2
Non-zero exit from a before-* hook aborts the operation.
.SS "Timeout"
Default: 3 seconds. Configurable via \fBRUSTOMATO_HOOK_TIMEOUT\fR
environment variable (value in milliseconds).
.SS "Hook environment variables"
.TS
box;
lb l
l l.
Variable;Description
RUSTOMATO_ROOT;Data directory path
RUSTOMATO_HOOK;Hook name (e.g. before-start-pomodoro)
RUSTOMATO_KIND;pomodoro or break
RUSTOMATO_UUID;Session UUID
RUSTOMATO_DURATION;Duration in minutes
RUSTOMATO_STARTED_AT;Unix timestamp of start
RUSTOMATO_FINISHED_AT;Unix timestamp (after-* only)
RUSTOMATO_CANCELLED_AT;Unix timestamp (after-* only)
RUSTOMATO_INTERRUPT_KIND;Internal or external (interrupt hooks)
RUSTOMATO_INTERRUPTIONS;Total interruption count
RUSTOMATO_ANNOTATION;Annotation body (annotate hooks)
.TE
.SS "Hook examples"
Create an executable script at
\fB$RUSTOMATO_ROOT/hooks/after-finish-pomodoro\fR:
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/usr/bin/env bash
terminal-notifier -message "Pomodoro over" -title rustomato
exit 0
.RE
.fi
.PP
Prevent pomodori after 10 PM (\fBbefore-start-pomodoro\fR):
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/usr/bin/env bash
if [ "$(date +%H)" -ge 22 ]; then
  echo "No pomodori after 10 PM!"
  exit 1
fi
exit 0
.RE
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
\fBRUSTOMATO_ROOT\fR
Data directory for the rustomato database and hooks.
Default: \fI~/.rustomato\fR.
.TP
\fBRUSTOMATO_DATABASE_URL\fR
SQLite database URL. If not set, the database is located at
\fB$RUSTOMATO_ROOT/data.db\fR. Default: \fI$RUSTOMATO_ROOT/data.db\fR.
.TP
\fBRUSTOMATO_HOOK_TIMEOUT\fR
Hook timeout in milliseconds. Default: 3000 (3 seconds).
.SH EXIT CODES
.TS
box;
cb cb
l l.
Exit code;Meaning
0;Success (for pomodoro: finished)
1;Error or cancelled (pomodoro Ctrl-C'd)
.TE
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI~/.rustomato/data.db\fR
Default SQLite database.
.TP
\fI~/.rustomato/hooks/\fR
User-provided hook scripts.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR skim (1),
.IR pomodoro (1)
.PP
Project repository: \fIhttps://github.com/suhlig/rustomato\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Steffen Uhlig <steffen@familie-uhlig.net>
